Internal Review: Containers RFC Update (#26)
NearNodeFlash/NearNodeFlash.github.io: docs/rfcs/0002/readme.md

state: discussion
---
# Rabbit storage for containerized applications

For Rabbit to provide storage to a containerized application there needs to be _some_ mechanism. The remainder of this RFC proposes that mechanism.

## Actors

There are several actors involved:

- The AUTHOR of the containerized application
- The ADMINISTRATOR who works with the author to determine the application requirements for execution
- The USER who intends to use the application using the 'container' directive in their job specification
- The RABBIT software that interprets the #DWs and starts the container during execution of the job

There are multiple relationships between the actors:

- AUTHOR to ADMINISTRATOR: The author tells the administrator how their application is executed and the NNF storage requirements.
- Between the AUTHOR and USER: The application expects certain storage, and the #DW must meet those expectations.
- ADMINISTRATOR to RABBIT: Admin tells Rabbit how to run the containerized application with the required storage.
- Between USER and RABBIT: User provides the #DW container directive in the job specification. Rabbit validates and interprets the directive.

## Proposal

> The proposal below outlines the high level behavior of using containers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal below outlines the high level behavior of running containers in a workflow:
```

2. The AUTHOR works with the ADMINISTRATOR to define:
    1. a unique name for the program to be referred by USER
    2. the pod template specification for executing their program

>     3. the NNF storage requirements described above.

Reviewer: Period or no period, that is the question. Based on the lines above, no period. I'm ambivalent.

Author: I struggled with this. I'm a period guy, but that's not consistent with the rest of the document.

> 3. The ADMINISTRATOR creates a corresponding _NNF Container Profile_ custom kubernetes resource with the necessary NNF storage requirements and pod specification as described by the AUTHOR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The ADMINISTRATOR creates a corresponding _NNF Container Profile_ Kubernetes custom resource with the necessary NNF storage requirements and pod specification as described by the AUTHOR
```

4. The USER who desires to use the application works with the AUTHOR and the related NNF Container Profile to understand the storage requirements

> 5. The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container fields populated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container directive variables populated
```

> 6. WLM runs the job and drives the job through the following stages...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. WLM runs the workflow and drives it through the following stages...
```

>     1. `Proposal`: RABBIT validates the #DW container directive by comparing the supplied values to what is listed in the NNF Container Profile. If the USER fails to meet the requirements, the job fails

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. `Proposal`: RABBIT validates the #DW container directive by comparing the supplied values to those listed in the NNF Container Profile. If the workflow fails to meet the requirements, the job fails
```

>     2. `PreRun`: RABBIT software will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. `PreRun`: RABBIT software:
```

>         1. create a config map reflecting the storage requirements and any runtime parameters; this is provided to the container at the volume mount named `nnf-config`, if specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        1. creates a config map reflecting the storage requirements and any runtime parameters; this is provided to the container at the volume mount named `nnf-config`, if specified
```

>         2. duplicate the pod template specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        2. duplicates the pod template specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.
```

>     3. The containerized application(s) executes. The expected mounts are available per the requirements and celebration occurs. The pods will continue to run until:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. The containerized application(s) executes. The expected mounts are available per the requirements and celebration occurs. The pods continue to run until:
```

       1. the pod completes successfully (any failed pods will be restarted)
       2. timeout (i.e. `activeDeadlineSeconds`) is hit (optional)
       3. the max number of pod retries (i.e. `backoffLimit`) is hit (indicating failure on all retry attempts)
          1. Note: retry limit is non-optional per Kubernetes configuration

>           2. If retries are not desired, this number could be set to disable any retry attempts.

Reviewer: What is the value used to disable retry?

Author: Setting this to 0 will disable any retries. I'll add that.

>     4. `PostRun`: RABBIT software will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    4. `PostRun`: RABBIT software:
```

       1. Mark the stage as `Ready` if the pods have all completed successfully. This includes any retries after preceding failures.

>        2. If all pods are completed but did complete successfully, the stage will not be marked as ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       2. If all pods are completed but did complete successfully, the stage is not be marked as ready.
```

>        1. the pod completes successfully (any failed pods will be restarted)

Reviewer 2: Doesn't "any failed pods will be restarted" depend on the restart policy?

Author: It's a bit confusing b/c we're not truly restarting the pod - we're creating a _new_ pod to try again. For the purposes of this RFC, I'm calling that a restart. 

In order to keep the failed pods around and allow for debugging/log inspection, we need to use `restartPolicy: Never`. I don't think we should even allow `restartPolicy: OnFailure`.

Reviewer 2: I think I need a summary of our slack conversations
- If I write an application that can successful restart after encountering a crash, is that`OnFailure`?
- If I write an application that does not support restarts, is that `Never`?

Author: - `OnFailure`: The pods will actually restart. This means that the pod restart count will increase. k8s will not fire up a new pod, but it will restart the same pod. You'll lose the log from any failures because the pod restarts.
- `Never`: Instead of a restart, you'll get a brand new pod. The logs from the old pods stick around.

So for both of your cases, you'd want `Never'.

For case #1, you set `Job.Spec.backoffLimit=N` where `N` is however many attempts you'd like to allow. This defaults to 6 in k8s.
For case #2, you set Job.Spec.backoffLimit=0`

Remember that by definition, jobs are in the business of firing up pods until a certain number of completions are hit, so it's always going to try retry. The `restartPolicy` is not telling the Job to retry, but rather _how_ to perform the retry. It's asking if it should try to restart the pod or fire up a new pod. We want new pods so that we can keep the logging history.

> A Job creates one or more Pods and will continue to retry execution of the Pods until a specified number of them successfully terminate. As pods successfully complete, the Job tracks the successful completions. When a specified number of successful completions is reached, the task (ie, Job) is complete. Deleting a Job will clean up the Pods it created. Suspending a Job will delete its active Pods until the Job is resumed again.

> A simple case is to create one Job object in order to reliably run one Pod to completion. The Job object will start a new Pod if the first Pod fails or is deleted (for example due to a node hardware failure or a node reboot).

More detail here:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/#handling-pod-and-container-failures

Reviewer 2: OK - that's very helpful. Thanks. Some form of this _can_ make it into the document, we've done things like collapsed details in the initial setup docs

I'm trying to shelter the customer from the k8s implementation. Our version of "restartPolicy" that meets their requirements doesn't need to match how it's implemented. But perhaps we introduce new names to avoid any confusion. 

And if I recall from our conversations, we can not control the back-off time in between restarts? We probably need to communicate this to LLNL as a limitation and ensure they are OK with it. I suggest using a question call-out

> You'll lose the log from any failures because the pod restarts.

Does the --previous flag help here?

Author: Also just wanted to point out that when we fire up new pods, they get a different IP. But if we have a headless service and set `hostname/subdomain` on these pods, other rabbit nodes and compute nodes can get the IP via dns.

If that's an issue, then we'd need to go back to `OnFailure`, but then that means we lose history/logging.

Author: > But perhaps we introduce new names to avoid any confusion.

I actually did this at first, but then went back to the k8s implementation names in case they wanted to look this up. But I think you're right. This stuff is confusing, and it'd be better if we made it less confusing by hiding the implementation.

> And if I recall from our conversations, we can not control the back-off time in between restarts? We probably need to communicate this to LLNL as a limitation and ensure they are OK with it. I suggest using a question call-out

That's just for _actual_ restarts when using `restartPolicy: OnFailure`. You are correct in that you cannot control the back-off time. More details: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#restart-policy

With `restartPolicy: Never`, we get new pods ASAP - there is no back-off time between retries in this case, so it would not be an issue. And since our Job only targets 1 node, we can guarantee that the new pod will land on the same node. The downside is that the pod gets a new IP (as I pointed out in my previous comment).

>        2. timeout (i.e. `activeDeadlineSeconds`) is hit (optional)

Reviewer 2: This doesn't make sense to me - How does a developer know how long the compute application will run? I think `activeDeadlineSeconds` is only useful _after_ transitioning to PostRun. But that would require us to change the value at runtime - can we do this?

Author: This is contraint for the k8s Job. If you set this to 300, it will kill the job's pods after 300 seconds and consider it failed.

Reviewer 2: Say I'm authoring SCR. My application runs alongside the compute resources however long the computes run (Flux decides). At that stage, why would you ever set a deadline in SCR? It's completely beholden to the compute application (and therefore Flux).

After Flux transitions the workflow to PostRun; that's when the timeout should start. But I'm not sure we can change the deadline after creation.

Author: That makes more sense. In this case, I was exposing k8s Job's deadline configuration. Maybe that's not helpful since they won't care how long the containers are running while in PreRun. Just PostRun.

When they transition to PostRun, it will stay `Ready:false` until the jobs are done running. At that point, Rabbit checks the return values of all the jobs to see if they passed. If they did, it will transition to `Ready:true` only if all the jobs are done and if they all succeeded.

If we start a timeout at the transition to PostRun, and pods are still running, what is the Rabbit SW expected to do here? Kill the pods? Flux could do that by transitioning to teardown if in the PostRun stage for X number of seconds.

Reviewer 2: > If we start a timeout at the transition to PostRun, and pods are still running, what is the Rabbit SW expected to do here? 
What does Kubernetes do to a Job exceeding the deadline?

I would expect the workflow to fail if that case

> Flux could do that by transitioning to teardown if in the PostRun stage for X number of seconds.
Flux will always do that - be it a stuck workflow or whatever. But as you have it presented `activeDeadlineSeconds` is a value the application author would decide on. So this is our opportunity to provide a specific error code / cause / reason to Flux that is valuable to the parties involved: Flux, User, and Author

Author: > What does Kubernetes do to a Job exceeding the deadline? I would expect Rabbit S/W to fail the workflow.

It will kill the pods and consider the Job failed; this deadline starts when the pods start. Like you pointed out, that's not helpful because the author doesn't know how long the workflow will be in PreRun (and probably doesn't care). I didn't fully understand that when I wrote this part up.

So I don't think we should even use this deadline, and we'll need to implement our own timer that starts in PostRun if that timer is hit, we can kill the pods that aren't finished.

> So this is our opportunity to provide a specific error code / cause / reason to Flux that is valuable to the parties involved: Flux, User, and Author

Do we set the workflow to have an error status then? (i.e. `Ready:false` & `Status:Error`)

Reviewer 2: > Do we set the workflow to have an error status then? (i.e. Ready:false & Status:Error)

Yes. Also, a Message field that's meant to convene some helpful information.

>        3. the max number of pod retries (i.e. `backoffLimit`) is hit (indicating failure on all retry attempts)

Reviewer 2: I don't know if I'd mention all these details in a simple high-level overview. You should use links and references where the details can be further explained
For example: "The application will execute with crashes and failures handled per the \[Restart Policy\](link to Restart Policy)"

Author: I think these are pretty important details to consider because we have to wrap up all these conditions into deciding if the PostRun stage should go to `Ready:true` or not. Isn't that the 1 mechanism we have to Flux to indicate the success of the containers?

Reviewer 2: I'm not saying "dont mention them." I'm saying structure your document so details and knowledge evolve from trivial examples to more select use cases and specialization

       3. Leave all pods around for log inspection

### Communication Details

Other than mounts, the following subsections outline the proposed communication between the Rabbit nodes themselves and the Compute nodes.

#### Rabbit-to-Rabbit Communication

> A headless kubernetes services will be deployed to connect the pods. This service will be unique to each container workflow. Each rabbit node would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A headless Kubernetes service connects the pods. This service is unique to each container workflow. Each rabbit node would be
```

reached via `<host-name>.<service-name>`. The service-name would be provided to the application via a well-known environmental variable.

> This has been prototyped and has proven to be successful. The list of rabbits that are open for communication will be provided as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has been prototyped and has proven to be successful. The list of Rabbits available for communication is provided as well.
```

> Other than mounts, the following subsections outline the proposed communication between the Rabbit nodes themselves and the Compute nodes.

Reviewer 2: Remove "Other than mounts"; that's a distraction.

#### Compute-to-Rabbit Communication

> For Compute to Rabbit communication, the proposal is to use an open port between the nodes, so the applications could communicate using IP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Compute to Rabbit communication, the proposal is to use an open port between the nodes, so the applications could communicate using IP protocol.
```

> This has been prototyped and has proven to be successful. The list of Rabbits available for communication is provided as well.

Reviewer 2: You should include a concrete example

Author: What would you like to see here?

Reviewer 2: The environmental variable and a sample config map

The port number would be assigned by the Rabbit software and included in the workflow resource's environmental variables after the Setup state (similar to workflow name & namespace).
Flux should provide the port number to the compute application via an environmental variable or command line argument. The containerized application
would always see the same port number using the `hostPort`/`containerPort` mapping functionality included in Kubernetes. To clarify, the Rabbit software is picking
and managing the ports picked for `hostPort`.

> This would require a range of ports, to be listed as open in the firewall configuration and specified in the rabbit system configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This requires a range of ports to be open in the firewall configuration and specified in the rabbit system configuration.
```

> This requires a range of ports to be open in the firewall configuration and specified in the rabbit system configuration.

Reviewer 2: We should include a sample SystemConfiguration resource with the port field, if only a snippet

The fewer the number of ports available increases the chances of a port reservation conflict that would fail a workflow.

> For safe port reusability, this port range must be large enough to account for the anticipated number of containerized jobs running concurrently. This allows time for the Linux kernel

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this level of detail is necessary. It's already mentioned they should over-provision ports

to prepare a port for reuse. The kernel must take this port range into consideration when defining the ephemeral port range.

#### Rabbit-to-Compute Communication

> Same approach as above.

Reviewer 2: If you consult the email chain, Rabbit-to-Compute communication, where the compute node would provide some TCP/IP server and a Rabbit client could contact it, is _not_ supported.

Author: That email chain is a mess and I might be missing emails since I didn't get all the them in the first place.

So just say this is not supported?

Reviewer 2: My emails aren't that poorly written, are they?
> **Rabbit to Compute communication**
> With the proposal above, the containerized application running on the Rabbit would act as a server and the compute nodes as clients. Is this sufficient, or do you require the reverse for Rabbit to Compute communication?

I didn't get a direct answer, but took that as "We do **not** need Rabbit to Compute"

        2. duplicates the pod template specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers
    3. The containerized application(s) executes. The expected mounts are available per the requirements and celebration occurs. The pods continue to run until:
       1. a pod completes successfully (any failed pods will be retried)
       2. the max number of pod retries is hit (indicating failure on all retry attempts)
          1. Note: retry limit is non-optional per Kubernetes configuration
          2. If retries are not desired, this number could be set to 0 to disable any retry attempts
    4. `PostRun`: RABBIT software:
       1. marks the stage as `Ready` if the pods have all completed successfully. This includes a successful retry after preceding failures
       2. starts a timer for any running pods. Once the timeout is hit, the pods will be killed and the workflow will indicate failure
       3. leaves all pods around for log inspection

### Container Assignment to Rabbit Nodes

> During `Proposal`, the USER must assign compute nodes for the container workflow. The assigned

Reviewer 2: Are you inserting these line breaks or am I looking at some GitHub rendering? Shouldn't need line breaks in a markdown file

Author: I'm breaking at 100 characters to make it easier to view/edit in text editor. It's makes it easier for me to use vim keybindings to edit files when lines are at reasonable length. Doesn't affect the rich formatting of the markdown though.

Reviewer 2: Would the character limit wreak havoc with any number/listed items? And now you've introduced a different formatting pattern that requires others to have that same pattern

Author: I haven't touched any of the lists for that exact reason. I can undo this if it's a pain point - I realize I'm introducing inconsistency here.

Author: I removed them

compute nodes determine which Rabbit nodes run the containers.

### Communication Details

The following subsections outline the proposed communication between the Rabbit nodes themselves and
the Compute nodes.

#### Rabbit-to-Rabbit Communication

Each rabbit node can be reached via `<hostname>.<subdomain>` using DNS. The hostname is a
combination of the workflow name and Rabbit node name. The workflow name is used for the subdomain.

For example, a workflow name of `foo` that targets `rabbit-node2` would be `foo-rabbit-node2.foo`.

Environment variables are provided to the container and ConfigMap for each rabbit that is targeted
by the container workflow:

```shell

> RABBIT_HOSTS=foo-rabbit-node2,foo-rabbit-node3

Reviewer 2: We use NNF_ elsewhere, specifically NNF_NODE_NAME. Also wonder if we should include something that makes this obvious it's an NNF container variable. Maybe NNF_CONTAINER_(NODES | SUBDOMAIN | DOMAIN).

Author: Good call. Is it reasonable to still use rabbit in the node names (e.g. `foo-rabbit-node2`) though? We do use rabbit quite a bit in the document.

Reviewer 2: Fine for now. Examples are much easier to change. We could stick with the `rabbit-node-X` / `compute-node-Y` pattern that is in a couple of entries in nnf-deploy's systems.yaml.

I'm terrible at naming things, so maybe check with others on their preferences

                mountPath: /foo/persistent
              - name: nnf-config
                mountPath: /nnf/config

>               ports:

Reviewer 2: Instead of throwing everything into one example (which is overwhelming), I think every section should include just the details of that section.

> If we continue the example from above, the `foo` application would expect the foo-local-storage path of `/foo/local` to contain several directories

Author: I seem to have an issue with future tense, don't I?

node-N
```

> Node positions are _not_absolute locations. WLM could, in theory, select 6 physical compute nodes at physical location 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, which would appear as directories `/node-0` through `/node-5` in the container path.

Reviewer 2: formatting?
